the answers it's all right you don't need to there's no right or wrong here so this is my interview with Lupe Olguin you go by Lupe not Guadalupe right I signed Guadalupe Olguin okay so maybe you can tell us
your name and your age or your birth date?
Yeah, my name is Guadalupe Elguin Lupe, and I was born on December 12, 1946.
I'm 72.8 months old.
I was born in L.A.
County, but I grew up in Fresno.
Oh, good, good.
Yeah, I was just going to ask you where you were born, where you, you know, kind of grew up.
but most of your childhood.
I grew up here in prison.
Okay.
And then, um, so this project really has just kind of like two main questions.
And from those two main questions, I, um, they, it ends up, you know, bringing up a whole bunch of other questions.
Yeah.
So the first main question that I have is, um,
What is your connection to the Chicano movement and do you see yourself as a participant of the Chicano movement?
My connection?
Well, I became connected with the Chicano movement in 1969 when I joined the Teatro Campesino with Luis Valdez and the group here in Fresno.
That was an eye opener for me as far as immigrants, as far as Chicanismo, as far as politics.
I mean, it was just a world of new information that I had never really
paid too much attention to.
And if I did, I didn't know where to go to find out more about it.
So I became involved and became a member of the Teatro 1969 and also became a member of the Brown Berets in 1969.
Oh, okay.
So how did you, you said that you, you joined Teatro Campesino in 69 here in Fresno.
What was the,
Like, how did that all come about?
Well, let me see.
I had just come back from staying, living with an aunt in Sacramento, and I voluntarily went to go work out there on the tomato machine for the season, and I ended up staying, and I experienced a...
a Migra raid over there in West Sacramento, which was pretty interesting, you know.
And so I stayed and lullagagged around and then something happened here at the house and so it was time to come back.
And when I came back, I was restless.
I had been, prior to that, I had tried to get into the Vista Volunteers, and they threw me out because I couldn't get along with people, according to them.
What is the Vista Volunteers?
Vista Volunteers is the Domestic Peace Corps.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
And I was stationed in Ogden, Utah.
Well, apparently...
I guess they didn't like my methodology or whatever it was.
I don't know.
I really, you know.
Anyway, I came back and then right after that is when I went to live with my aunt for the year.
In Sacramento?
In Sacramento.
And I stayed there and then I came back to Fresno and I was restless, you know, because I didn't want to stay at the house and basically do nothing.
I mean, you know, I wasn't looking for anybody to settle down with and
all that good domestication type stuff.
So then I was out and about and I heard about this Teatro Campesino and so I went and dropped in, it was at a church, and so I went in and I heard music there.
And it was Daniel Valdez and he was sitting on the stage and he caught my attention because he sounded a lot like Jose Feliciano.
And so I sat down and I listened to him and I just kept on going back.
And some of the people there, you know, started talking to me and stuff.
And the more I heard and the more I listened, the more I saw, the more I...
I was curious and the more I wanted to know.
So Lupe Valdez wasn't married to Luis at the time, but she kind of took me under her wing and she helped to get me into the Teatro Campesino.
And I worked there as a backstage manager.
When we went out on trips, I would load up this trunk that we had with all the props and stuff as much as would fit and just make sure that everything was ready to go for all the octos that they were going to do that day.
I wasn't on the stage because I have stage fright, so that wasn't me.
But I did, you know, a lot better backstage.
So I traveled with them during that time.
And it was during that time that I started collecting buttons from all the places that I went to.
So my first button that I collected was in 1969.
It's 50 years old this year.
Wow.
I've got several of them.
So when you said you traveled with him, are you talking about like their tours to the Southwest and stuff like that?
Well, not necessarily the Southwest, just basically here in California.
Oh, okay.
We went to all the universities, well, not all the universities, but many universities, colleges, junior colleges, and from down south to...
The Bay Area, I don't think I went much further than the Bay Area, Berkeley and all that.
And everything in between.
And everywhere I went, if there was a button, I got it.
And got to meet a lot of people and got a lot of experience about impromptus and stuff like that.
And it was just a whole bunch of fun.
And it was an eye-opener about Chicanismo, about politics, and white people didn't like Chicano power and stuff like that.
And they'd rather be Hispanic than not.
And just people...
having somewhat of a narrow scope of who they were.
You're talking about Chicanos or Mexican-Americans?
Mexican-Americans and Hispanics, basically.
More Hispanic than Mexican-Americans.
When I was in the Brown Berets, one of the things that my leader always drilled into us was that in every Mexican-American there's a potential Chicano.
And so that was our motto there.
So can I ask you a couple of things?
So one thing you were mentioning, you said that you were feeling restless.
And I was kind of curious, like, what was this restlessness from?
Was it just like your personality or were there things?
Because you mentioned in Sacramento, you were talking about the migrant raid.
Was it political stuff like that that was making you feel restless, like you wanted to do something, or was it just something else?
A combination.
I didn't want to be home cleaning house.
take care of my younger brother and just being domesticated because I knew there was much more to life than that.
I had been at City College and I was in the Latin American group and Vietnam was going on at the time.
So I knew there was much more in the world out there than just being at home and waiting for somebody to come charging them out.
you know, what is it, the white horse or... Putting a ring on it?
Yeah.
Something along that line, you know.
That wasn't my interest.
I wanted to find out what the Mika Raid was about.
Right.
You know, and why did that happen?
And just, you know, why people were content just to sit home and wait for something, you know, when...
you could be doing something about something.
I was aware of Vietnam.
I didn't like it.
My brother was in Vietnam.
And I just had an eye opener as far as political awareness and not necessarily wanting to be a leader, but wanting to find out more about what the injustices were about.
Yeah, I'm hearing that a lot from
Some of the other people that I've interviewed is kind of the connection to the Vietnam War, that a lot of people were affected by this and that it kind of, whatever anti-war sentiments they were having is what kind of pushed them a little more towards becoming more, like wanting to participate more in Chicano movement stuff or Chicano power stuff, right?
Well, yeah, and my parents were organizers themselves.
They were in the community service organization here in Fresno, and that's where they met Cesar Chavez, because that's what he was doing here at the time.
So they became involved in that.
So as we were growing up, my brother and I, we were aware of some of this.
There's another side of the story here.
But the way that we grew up, we grew up in a...
a real snug family environment because my parents and my relatives they all sang and and played the guitar and you know music was part of our culture and and all the sob stories that go with it you know everybody's crying and all these things you know these songs and stuff my dad wrote music you know so I knew there was more than just
waiting and hanging around and what motivated my dad, what motivated my mother.
So I had to go out and I had to go find out what was going on for me.
So I was deeply inspired by the teatro and as far as the Vietnam War, I didn't want my brother there.
I wanted him back.
A couple of his friends had already died there.
And it hit home a lot.
And then here with all the pickets and... Like the UFW march and stuff like that?
Is that what you're talking about?
Well, when I went into the...
Teatro, that's when I found out about the pickets and how they came about.
But before that, I really didn't know about them.
Like when I was involved in the Migra in 68, the Teatro was already here and the UFW was too.
But I didn't hear about it over there in Sacramento.
I heard about it here in Fresno, but I saw it here in Fresno.
And that inspired me because I was already in the Brown Berets as well and we were doing breakfast programs and having political meetings and talking about an alternative political perspective, you know, political parties.
So there was a lot of stuff going on at the same time for me, you know.
But I was just a real busy bee at that time, you know.
And what, um, I was going to ask you if you could say a little bit more about your participation with the Brown Berries.
Like, how did you get involved with that?
When I left the house, I, I was, uh, I was, I was an only, well, I was the only daughter.
So there were a lot of expectations, you know, and, uh, I didn't quite meet up to them.
You know, I didn't want to sit home.
Uh,
And I had stopped going to school for a bit.
This is my daughter, okay?
And so when I was out and I was...
checking out the teatro, there's a friend of mine who was actually one of the berets who guided me and took me to the meetings and stuff.
And I liked what I heard.
I liked the logic behind it.
And I was really prime with this.
In every Mexican-American, there's a potential Chicano.
And so I became a beret in July, July 6th, I think, of 1969.
I have my brown book.
And I traveled with the Burris and we had meetings here and stuff and just got more politicized, you know, alternatives to the Democratic and Republican parties.
So there's more to life than just red and white and black and blue and green and yellow.
Yeah.
And what would you how would you describe that group or the Brown Burris when you first joined it?
As opposed to, I mean, I would imagine there's maybe been some changes or, you know, throughout the years.
But what was it like?
What was it about during that time period?
I know you mentioned that, you know, there's a Chicano and every Mexican-American.
Yeah.
I'll show you a picture.
Yeah, sure.
And I'll show it to you.
These are my homies.
These are my buddies.
My brother's in here in Fresno.
I'd get the smaller one, but I'd have to look for it.
But this is all over the place now.
But these are my brothers.
This is the Fresno chapter.
What's the first chapter?
Is that here in Fresno?
Oh, LA.
It came from LA.
And my friend Nanny, who's with the Barrios Unidos, kind of like just took over this picture.
And anyway, what inspired me, what happened with the Brown Berets, these people right here,
This is Catarino Hurtado.
He was the main person that got everybody together.
And this is the person that got me into the berets.
And my mentor, besides Cat and Pat, is not in here.
But we talked philosophy, we read books, you know, and we talked about
injustices here in Fresno.
We talked about what we could do to help out, you know, the poor people, you know, we started breakfast programs here at the school.
And we were here
The motto for the Brown Berets is to serve, observe, and protect.
And I believe that wholeheartedly.
And also that once you're a beret, you're always a beret.
So the difference between these people here and what inspired me with these people, these guys here, there were women too, okay?
There were about six of us, but you don't see us here.
And I got there right when they were getting up.
So I missed out on this, but yeah.
But anyway, the difference between these people here is that they protected their families, but their families didn't really get involved with them.
They stayed home.
The Brown Berets here in Fresno, from what I can see, their families are involved, but it's not quite as aggressive as my brother's here, okay?
And...
When I was in the berets, if they wanted to go dance, if there was a shindig going on or something that we were at, they would say, here, Lupita, hold this for me.
So there they are, and they're giving me their cuetes, and I'm putting them in my bag so they can go dance.
That's how they saw me.
I was a sister.
Thank you.
But I don't know how many other people know the names of these guys here.
I've never heard anybody made mention of them.
But I know pretty much all of their placasos, like this one right here, is cornets.
Chicago, Patricio, Joe, Joselito, Cat, Bobby Reyes, Joe, Joe, Mongolian.
You know, he had like four or five Joes.
But they were all different.
And he's died of AIDS in prison because a lot of them were junkies.
And that was a big difference between our group here that don't really talk about.
But if you met us then and you knew us, you knew that some of these guys were a little bit weird, you know.
But everybody and...
focused on familia and what we could bring to the community as far as services.
And that's why the breakfast program to us was a really good thing.
It got the city inspired to continue with it at a later point.
Because there was nothing at the time.
Right.
In many ways, kind of the program or the mission that you're talking about here reminds me of like the Black Panthers in Oakland, right?
Yeah.
And so would you say that they were very much influenced by the Black Panther program?
Or would you say maybe it's kind of its own organic scene?
Along the parallel lines.
Yes, you know, there's a lot of similarities, you know.
But to me, the Black Panthers, they were more aggressive.
And, you know, these guys, I saw them as protectors, you know.
And they would, if they had to, you know,
stand up, you know, for your rights.
But they wouldn't start riots or start beating up people and stuff like that.
They weren't those type of men, you know.
And you saw, like, the Black Panthers as more aware?
Yeah, they were a little bit more aggressive, more reactionary.
And we were reactionary, but we thought about it.
We saw it from a different light.
and then which road should we take.
And a lot of that had to do with Cat, okay, because he was the one that was the stabilizer.
And he was the one that would say all the time, in every Mexican-American, there's a potential Chicano.
That was him.
And so he did a lot for the group, and everybody admired him, and we were known in L.A., you know, well, we were known all over the place, you know.
because we're a particular group and very unique.
And there were a lot of fun.
So in between the Teatro Campesino, I was going to the Brown Beret meetings, you know, back and forth.
And then you have said that you were part of the Fresno State Alumni Association, right?
The Chicano Alumni Association.
Chicano Alumni Association.
So during that time period that you're...
In 69, when you're getting involved with the Brown Berets and with Teatro Campesino, are you already a student at Fresno State or not yet?
In 1969, I went to Fresno State.
I was in the teatro.
Luis Valdez was teaching there.
And Elisa Risco and several other activists, okay?
And I had a health...
issue that made me drop out and so I didn't go back for about 20 years but my brother had just come back from Vietnam right around that time and he was going to City College and you know getting his education started there and then he went to Fresno State and he and another
Vietnam vet I guess we're talking and they saw I think it happened in Santa Barbara I'm not quite sure Chicano commencement that they had done over there and they wanted to bring it to Fresno so they wrote a thesis my brother wrote a thesis on and brought the Chicano commencement to Fresno State and this year they celebrated 43 years it's the largest
I know it was probably the oldest and the largest in the United States, you know.
And so from the beginnings where I think there were like 56 graduates in the beginning in 1977, they had like 11, 1200 this year, you know.
Interesting.
Yeah, but that was all
from him, but I was still out here and I would join him, you know, during the ceremony because I liked it.
I thought it was pretty cool.
The graduate would sit there and say, you know, five minutes worth of something.
You could at the time because it was small.
And to the family and the children running up and down and all that stuff, you know.
And so that...
I got where he was coming from.
And so I just always supported it and every year I'd go out whenever I could and be there to help him.
So that was always part of my being because it was him.
Yeah.
So, okay, the picture I'm getting, just tell me if I'm correct or not, but it sounds like, so you're from Fresno, you're in Fresno during this time period, 1969, and just by virtue, because it's not necessarily that you're
you're encountering Brown Berets or Teatro Campesino as a student at Fresno State but you're just you're part of the community here and they're part of the community here and so you're kind of getting involved that way you end up going to or finishing at Fresno State right
um okay so that's kind of yeah i was a community worker you got that right okay and i went in this community and when i was working with the chicano commencement i was the community uh contact okay okay cool um oh the other thing i was going to ask you you had you had mentioned the church that teatro campesino was performing at and i was just curious if it was saint alphonse or saint alphonse no it was a church that was uh
I don't know if it was abandoned or anything or they had left it and relocated.
So the Teatro Campesino used it as their center, their cultural center.
So it was just like some kind of like, kind of dust water?
Yeah.
Like, oh, here's a building with four walls.
No, I guess they rented it, you know, but anyway, it had everything that you could ask.
It had offices, it had a stage and, you know,
you could sit down and watch the theater perform and you could practice there, you know, and, uh, it was just really convenient.
And, uh, and we got paid $5 of performance.
Nice.
All right.
So, um, I kind of want to go back a little bit to your,
what you were talking about with your parents.
So you said that your parents had been involved in the CSO, right?
And so did you feel like that was...
like kind of growing up with parents who were somewhat politically aware or conscious, that that translated to your kind of, you know, you were talking about being restless.
And you're how old during this time?
Like in your maybe early 20s?
Oh, I'm in my early 20s, yeah.
When they were in the CSO, I was younger, I was in high school.
But I didn't know.
I didn't realize that that was what they were doing.
And it was just a way of life for us.
Right.
You know?
And I never heard of Caesar.
I didn't know who he was.
I didn't hear about Caesar until later.
And my mom and dad said, oh, yeah, he was, we met him when he was over here and he was working with us organizing.
I said, oh, okay.
You know, that guy, you know, okay.
And your parents, were they involved with the CSO and that?
Because they were farm workers themselves or?
Well, they grew up, you know, in the campesino world.
But my dad had a heart condition, so he couldn't stay out there working.
So he had to find an office job or something.
So he ended up working with the city of Fresno for like 29 and a half years.
And my mother, she was always...
bettering herself and went to, got a high school diploma, just found ways to, you know, do things better for her family because they were poor when they were younger and nobody had any money.
So, in fact, my folks were the rich people in the family, you know, on both sides.
But...
I just remember as a youngster that my dad always seemed to be searching for a better way, a better life, for the family to be up to a better status,
I don't know what the hell he was looking for.
And my mother, too, you know, and the people that they met and stuff like that.
And working with the CSO and then going, working in the church, you know, doing religious stuff.
They were always doing something.
And that's the way that we grew up, always doing something.
Like involved it with the community in some way.
Me.
Me, but them, yes, with the community, the church, the family parties.
They were the leaders, you know?
In our family, they were the leaders.
Like the organizers, like, hey, we're doing this.
And that's all that we knew.
My younger brother, he grew up that way.
I'm 13 years older than him.
And so that's all that he knew.
We went from meeting to meeting to meeting with my folks.
That reminds me of when I was a kid, my mom used to have this picture of Che Guevara.
And I always thought for the longest time, like, oh, that's my uncle.
But yeah, so I totally understand that.
But your parents, so were they, like how long has your family been in California or were they, like my grandparents, my grandparents are I think first generation because their parents were in Mexico during the revolution and came over to the United States kind of like
maybe like in the 20s, in the early 20s, they came over to the United States and then both of my grandparents were born here.
But were your parents, had your family been here in California for a long time or were they kind of also recent or first generation from Mexico?
My grandparents on my mom's side are from Sinaloa.
On my dad's side, they're from Chihuahua.
And both my mom and dad grew up in Somerton, Arizona, which is like 12, 13 miles from Yuma, Arizona.
And of course, right down the street from Somerton is San Luis, Rio Colorado in Mexico.
So we grew up, you know, knowing about the border and
the border patrol over there and all the campesinos and the, I mean, we'd go visit them and you'd see the, the indios over there in their, uh, uh, wagons, you know, going down the middle of the street, you know, and so there was a lot of, a lot of mixture of people.
But, uh, when my parents, uh,
got married, they went to L.A., and that's why I was born in L.A., and that was during the Pachuco time, and my mother didn't want my dad to be involved in the Pachuco, so back to Yuma, and my brother was born in Yuma, and then my uncle, because he and my dad were in the military together, and he came... World War II?
Yeah, okay.
But he was a carpenter,
cabinet maker and he came to Fresno and he told my dad come over here because they were living in projects.
So my mom and dad came over but we didn't quite live in the projects right away.
We lived on the west side in a little garage and eventually we got into the projects and then from there my dad started going up, up and up and my mother
you know, better, better, and better for us because they didn't want for us to be poor like they had grown up.
So yeah, they were born in the United States.
My grandparents were born in Mexico.
And oddly enough, my grandfather on my mom's side, my great-grandmother was Mayo, India, and he always denied that.
You know, he denied the indigenous
But that was pretty common in him.
So I'm Yakimaio because of my culture.
Yeah, so that's a good, maybe a good point for us to switch into the other conversation about mestizaje.
But before I do that, is there anything else you want to talk about in terms of your participation with the Chicano movement?
Yeah.
that we haven't covered already?
I mean, we talked about Teatro Campesino, Brown Berets.
I don't know if there's anything else.
Well, yeah, that was a really strong point in my life.
I was really happy doing all of that.
And there were some negative things that came afterwards, you know, but
That was just part of life and moving on.
And I eventually went back to Fresno State.
It took me 20 years.
But I got back in, got a B.A.
in liberal studies.
And then I ended up going through the social work program.
So I was a child protective services social worker for 16 years.
Oh, wow.
Based on what I learned out on the streets.
Yeah, that's great.
Yeah.
Actually, I was going to ask you, at Fresno State, do they have like a Chicano Studies or something like that?
Yeah, they do.
But it wasn't there when I was there.
Right.
I missed all of that.
That came after the fact.
Do you know when that program started?
Well, when I went back to Fresno State, I went in the mid-80s.
I graduated in 89 with my VA.
Mm-hmm.
So I was there in like about 86 and they were already there, but I didn't participate in any of that because my focus, and they even had a re-entry program for, you know, olders.
But I didn't do any of that.
The only thing that I participated in and my only focus was the Chicano commencement.
That was it.
So how did you get involved with the Chicano Alumni Association?
Chicano commencement is the umbrella from the Chicano alumni.
Okay, I gotcha.
And I'm still working with the Chicano alumni.
It's changed from association to Chicano alumni club.
And we're the ones that are going to have that banquet.
Yeah.
So I was going to say that a couple of weeks ago, I did an interview with Lupa and Luis Valdez.
Oh, yeah.
And they were talking about how...
You know, Luis's first classes are the classes that he was teaching there when like kind of mid to late 60s.
Right.
1969.
Yeah.
Well, I think he said that it was or maybe it was Lupe who mentioned it.
But yeah, it may have been like a couple of years earlier.
Yeah.
That they had, that he was teaching classes under this label of raza studies, right?
And so I was just wondering if maybe there was a connection between what he was doing with the raza studies to then what ended up becoming Chicano studies there.
But it sounds like there was a really big gap between what he was doing there and then what may have become a Chicano studies department.
Yeah.
Yeah, it was more that.
They initiated it.
Valdez.
Yeah, and Eliezer Risco.
What is that?
Eliezer?
Eliezer Risco.
He passed away.
E-L-I-Z-E-R.
Z-E-R.
Eliezer.
I forgot.
Ellie said S-E-R?
Z-E-R?
Risco's his last name.
R-I-S-E-O.
R-I-S... He's a Cubano.
Oh, Risco?
Uh-huh.
Okay.
Yeah.
Maybe I can look him up on Google or something.
Yeah, yeah, he lived here.
Or I could ask probably Luis would know.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
I actually have...
the show that they had over there at Fresno State in 1969 while he was teaching there.
And some of those students became some of the workers for the Teatro Campesino.
Your dad was one of them, you know, that came over from that student group.
Yeah.
I was, I should ask you that.
How did you meet my dad that was here at Fresno, right?
Yeah, that was when Luis was teaching over there at Fresno State.
And your dad was one of the students that came over to Actos and, you know, work with Luis because he liked him.
Yeah.
You know, him and Manuel Pickett and...
several other people.
So that's where I got to meet those guys.
That was fun.
All right.
Let me see if there's anything else I want to add.
One other thing.
Sure.
That I really enjoyed while I was in the theater is, you know, the epic poem, I am Joaquin by Corky Gonzalez.
I was
in the teatro when they were practicing in the music and Luis was telling the story, you know, the poem as we know it now, you know.
And one of my, well, my co-worker, Teresa, played the recorder.
Teresa's one of the ones that helps me out with these...
pots and saucers now she's one of my neighbors so I've known her for 50 years oh wow you're still around how nice and then you guys live like right next to each other yeah but she did the recorder and that was really really awe inspiring I had never heard the poem and I was just amazed by it and the way it came down so when we saw it afterwards you know as you know like with the first showing and all that and the response from all the people
Boy, that was a proud time, you know.
Wow.
That's great.
Okay, so that's another good kind of segue to that next question about mestizaje.
So you're familiar with the term mestizaje or mestizo identity?
Mestizo, yes.
Mestizaje, I know.
Mestizaje?
It's kind of like Chicano X and Chicana X type stuff now.
They keep changing.
Yeah, that is true.
Mestizaje is more like, it'd be kind of like, you know, when you use the term Chicano to refer like, oh, I'm a Chicano, right?
But when you say Chicanismo, that means something more like kind of like the idea of what it is to be a Chicano, right?
So mestizaje is kind of like that.
So you would say maybe like mestizo would refer to the identity of
And then mestizaje would be like the whole concept of what that means and all that.
Does that make sense?
Kind of.
So, I mean, it's basically like, it's basically the same.
It means the same thing, mestizaje, mestizo.
It's just kind of like another way of saying it.
So, but you're familiar with what it means to be mestizo.
or what that means.
Yeah, I think the one that says it from my perspective, the one who's said it in an eloquent way is Daniel Valdez with his Mestizo in America de los Indios.
He tells the story and of course he's very... This is a song
you're talking about?
Uh, yeah, he, he, uh, yeah, America de los Injos is a song, but, uh, it's the story of a mestizo, you know, and, uh, I recently got it and I saved it on my phone.
I could show it to you.
Yeah, that would be great.
And, uh,
Maybe I could forward it to you or something so you can listen to it.
Sure.
But it's really great.
And he talks about all the clashings and the, you know, identity, the loss of identity, the need for identity.
the resurgence of identity.
It's kind of like what's happening with the natives right now.
I'm reading a book right now called There, There, and it's about an Oakland powwow.
And these youngsters, they're young adults, teenagers and stuff, they're wanting to know more about their Indian culture.
you know, more of their history, oral history.
Nobody's telling them.
Right.
You know, nobody wants to talk about it.
So they use the word urban natives, which to me, I could relate to that.
Yeah.
You know, when I think some of it, too, is not just that they don't want to talk about it, but a lot of people just don't know because that's part of kind of like the oppression, right, is
taking, taking kids away from their families so that they don't know these things and there's a disconnect, right?
And that's what the story entails.
Yeah.
So that's, that's really interesting because you are, you're right.
You're starting to see this kind of like resurgence of, um, you know, people want to know who they're, who they are and what they're about and, you know, and are recognizing
hey, there's this kind of, like, gap between, you know, what my parents know and don't know and what my ancestors, their parents or their grandparents knew, and now I don't have access to them because they're gone, right?
And all the política behind that.
Yeah.
It's really amazing.
Yeah, exactly.
Another story.
Yeah.
So this song that you were just talking about by Danny.
Daniel Lopez, yeah.
You're talking, you're talking about Luis's brother, right?
Yeah.
Um, that, that he kind of talks about the story of the mestizo in that song, right?
And, um, but just before you were talking about Corky's Yo Soy Joaquin, right?
I am Joaquin, yeah.
And would you say they're kind of like similar or is there like
a real kind of big difference between what Corky is talking about and then what Danny is talking about in this song?
There are similarities, yes.
Danny is... he...
he's more comfortable saying it through music and Corky was more comfortable saying it through words and poetry.
But along the same line, the losses, the suffering, the resurgence, the pride, all of that,
Corky wrote it one way and Danny sings it another way.
But there's a lot of similarities.
Would you say that you're, like, were you introduced to this idea of mestizo because of your participation, like hearing that poem through Luis?
or hearing this song through Danny's music?
Or is it something that you were aware of before interacting with these different groups?
Well, in my own family, we didn't talk about indigenousness, okay?
Nobody was Native.
You didn't want to be Native.
What did they, do you remember, like, how did they refer to themselves?
Well, they didn't talk about them.
My grandfather didn't talk about his mother.
I never met her and if I did, I don't remember her.
My mother didn't talk about her, but she did a little bit when she would show us how she and my uncle did the matachines, the dents.
So there was something there, but it was something that was repressed because that wasn't what the family wanted to hear because
they were of lesser being, you know, and my grandfather didn't see himself that way, you know.
This was your, you're talking about your, but you're talking about your, your great grandmother who was Mayan?
She was Mayo.
Oh, Mayo.
Mayo, yeah.
They're the cousins to the Yaqui.
Okay.
They're from Sinaloa.
Oh, okay.
Yeah, not the Mayo.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, Mayo.
Mayo, yeah.
And, and,
In trying to pursue my own history, I've learned a lot about him, of course, learned more than I ever knew.
And only through my insistence that, you know, this is part of my history, part of my culture, and part of my being, you know, that's why I pursued it, you know, because there was more to me than what my parents had,
proposed, I suppose.
And that was always a curiosity to me.
I remember when I was 12, my mother sent me to the store inside while they waited in the car and told me to get a gift for a , one of the daughters or something like that was having a party.
So I did, and it was a copper bracelet, very indigenous looking.
And I got it, and my mother saw it, and she said, oh, how embarrassing.
They're going to think that they're Indian.
And I'm looking at its beauty.
Totally different planes.
But that was the first time I heard that, and it stayed on my mind.
There's something wrong here.
Interesting.
I was 12.
So it took a while to catch up, but I'm here.
So this was something, well, okay, so it sounds like what you're saying is that prior to any of your involvement with Chicano movement groups or organizations, that you had an awareness that there is some sort of indigenous element to who you were, but that it was repressed by your own family.
Mm-hmm.
And do you know, like, why they did that?
Or did you have any idea?
Or you just... At the time, I didn't know why.
At the time, I didn't know why they were acting that way or why they would not want to speak about their relatives openly.
Mm-hmm.
And only in researching and doing readings did it become more clear that it was more like a survival tactic with their relatives, with their families, because in Mexico, you know, they didn't like the Indians and the Spaniards didn't like the Indians, you know, and so they were always being killed or enslaved or
you know exploited yeah exploited belittled you know they were always the lesser being and so part of that was survival on that part you know the yaki and the mayo and all the other indios and uh and then it became more of a political thing with the families i think in my own family and and uh
And an embarrassment in a sense, you know, because on my mother's side, you have a whole slew of colors.
You have green eyes, you have gray eyes, blue eyes, hazel, a lot of Spaniard.
And on my dad's side, well, here I am.
You know, you have a lot of native, you know, I look very, very brown.
And...
And so my grandfather, my mother's dad, didn't care for me too much.
Or my brother because we were too Indian looking.
And they accepted my brothers more than they did me because they were taller.
My brother has green eyes, hazel eyes, and they spoke more eloquently and all these other
a rationale as to why they would be more acceptable, but not me.
And so it became kind of like, I want to know why.
So that's why I got more interested and more involved.
And I wanted to find out more about my own family, you know, and so that my brother started me out with that because my youngest brother, because he's married to Chukchuan Si Table Mountain.
tribal member?
No, she's one of those that is having issues with the tribal enrollment, stuff like that.
And that goes back to a lot of politica and stuff.
So she's a descendant of them, but is having issues with that.
And she's got her enrollment numbers and stuff, but the acceptance by the tribes and all that politica that they're involved in.
But that kind of opened my eyes about, well,
What about me?
And I'm hearing my brother talk.
So I went beyond my brother.
And I, you know, learned more about it.
And I actually made a family tree.
You know, go back like seven, nine generations.
Then I'm stuck.
Yeah.
So it sounds like you... Maybe you didn't...
Maybe you didn't, like, talk or use those exact terms of mestizo or mestizaje, but it's something that's around or you're aware of.
There's an indigenous aspect to who we are as Mexicans, right, or Mexican, Mexicano or Chicano.
Yeah.
Being in the US.
Did you ever think of it?
Like, I know that Corky, when he talks about it, he talks about it in terms of we're both colonized or uncolonized, right?
We're Spanish and we're indigenous, right?
That that's what the mestizo is.
Yeah.
None of this came about for me until I actually
became part of the Teatro Campesino.
They're the ones that opened all of that.
They opened the door for me.
If there was something in the past as I was growing up, it was always at the back of my head that there was something beyond what my parents and grandparents were saying or thinking or feeling.
But it wasn't until I got into the Teatro Campesino
And the Brown Berets that we spoke about openly.
And that's when the doors opened for me.
Because then I knew about what a mestizo was.
I learned about indigenous culture.
I learned about the colonialism, you know, more so than what I had learned in school.
And so that became a...
the greatest avenue for me.
Right.
So you would say that a lot of, or would you say that a lot of your kind of education about Chicanismo, mestizo identity, the history, all of that, really kind of began a lot more with your participation with Teatro Campesino and Brown Berets.
I would say so.
Yeah.
100% because what I learned at City College, you know, it brought questions to mind, okay?
But there were no avenues, okay?
And so when I came across the Teatro Campesino and the Brown Berets with their politicizing,
that's when the doors opened and I was able to see beyond, you know, the books.
So you had questions and they had answers.
Yeah, basically.
Okay, okay, that's interesting.
I want to see, let me think if there's anything else really I want to ask about that.
What do you, do you have any, do you have any kind of commentary on how you might view Chicano identity today?
I know you had mentioned earlier the Chicano, Chicanx, Latinx stuff.
So I was just wondering if you, like, do you see a kind of like,
what do I want to call it, like a lineage between what's happening today and what was going on when you were, you know, in your early 20s being involved in these groups?
You know, it's an interesting question because with the Chicano Alumni Club, we recently installed three new board of directors.
They're all young, all three of them.
And in between, there's this gap, you know, with the, with the,
I don't want to refer to us as the oldsters, but I don't know.
The way I see it is that they got the message.
In between from here to over here, there were a lot of people that saw the message and understood the message to a degree, but didn't apply the message.
And these youngsters have.
And so they're joining us in this endeavor, you know, to keep Chicanismo alive, you know.
And so one of the,
One of the board members is a teacher, middle school, and she talks Chicana X and Chicano X and all that.
And it's like, I don't even know if I'm saying it right, you know, because like, you know, Chicano power to me, that's all it's ever been.
But there's a lot of hope and a lot of inspiration because it's a resurgence of Chicano power and Chicanismo.
within the educational structure, you know, because for so many years, the educators were trying to ignore it, minimize it, you know, set it aside, you know, whatever, you know, very few people actually
holding on, you know.
And so I see that changing now.
And when you say it, what exactly are you referring to?
Do you mean like the principles of Chicanismo or are you talking about like the activity or the activism?
Well, all of that.
All of that was going wayward.
And I see a resurgence.
Just by your research here, you're one of two other people that I know of that are doing this along similar lines and wanting to know what happened in the 60s, you know, that...
that piqued their interest, you know.
And like today with the speaker over there at Arte Americas, you know, he's going to be talking about the 60s and the 70s.
You know, a lot of people really didn't want to talk about that, you know, because it was a lot of turmoil and a lot of misgivings.
And you're talking about, like, when you were at Fresno State in the 80s, like the mid to late 80s?
Is that what you're...
In the 80s, I didn't participate in anything over there because it was kind of, it was there, it was, the program was there, but there was nothing there for me, you know.
And it wasn't until I had to graduate in Division IX
with Chicano Latino studies, some type of class or something in that division.
So I took a class from Ernesto Martinez because he's the only person that I saw knowing what the hell he was talking about, you know.
And it was about the Chicano movement and stuff.
So that was interesting, you know, to see it from his perspective, from an educational perspective and teaching it to other youngsters.
And I'm listening.
And I said, uh-huh, uh-huh.
I remember, you know, I did.
So now I see this resurgence and this interest coming in, where people aren't embarrassed, they're not ashamed, they want to know more, and it's not...
it's not something to be embarrassed about anymore.
Like it was when I was coming around, my parents were embarrassed for me, you know.
And there was nothing there to be embarrassed about.
I was just exposing what was there.
But it was them not wanting to know, just like with the indigenous.
They didn't want to know about their culture.
You know, they didn't want to know about their families.
because they were moving forward.
And I was going back.
And that's always been me, though.
That's interesting to think about it that way, that your parents were maybe, because they had this
It sounds like what you were saying is that they had some kind of ambition to do better.
They had a drive to succeed, not only for themselves, but for their children.
But for their family and stuff, yeah.
And that was implanted in the minds of the people in that era.
Were your parents born kind of in the 20s or maybe earlier?
No, my dad was born 1921.
four and my mother in 29.
So they're from the twenties.
Yeah.
So they would have grew up kind of like at the beginning of the depression in this country that had an effect everywhere.
Also the revolution is kind of like still, you know, it hasn't,
Hasn't completely leveled off yet.
Yeah.
And what else is going on?
The war.
Yeah, they didn't talk about any of that stuff.
Everything was real rosy.
Let's sing a song.
But it's interesting that that is kind of their ambition, but then you were talking about them being involved in the CSO and working with the community or doing a lot of stuff with the community.
So even though they strive for us to be achievers, they still, I think, tried to hold on to
what made them comfortable.
Or was familiar to them.
Yeah, it was familiar to them.
Were they Catholics in terms of the church?
Yes, they were master catechists.
I grew up with all that.
Out of curiosity, and also kind of going back to the mestizaje, mestizo stuff, one of the things that was
a point that was coming up in some of my other interviews was about how, like, being exposed to the Virgen, the Virgen de Guadalupe, right, was kind of this early introduction to, like, mestizo or mestizaje, that, you know, that you have this kind of, like, mixture between, here's this figure who is indigenous,
but is being appropriated by the Catholic Church.
Oh, it goes way beyond that with me.
That's my birthday, December 12th.
Oh, right, right, right.
Yes.
According to my mother, I am the Guadalupe in the family.
Everybody else is not a true Guadalupe.
You know?
I grew up with Guadalupe, the Virgen de Guadalupe, you know, is the holiest of the holies all my life.
Because I was born on that day.
Right.
And so everything that my mother especially did was geared towards the Virgen.
And I didn't follow that line.
But later on, you know, they were involved in the church.
They were part of the... Like the Guadalupanos?
They were Guadalupanos, yes.
They were master catechists.
They were everything the church had.
Okay.
But they believed wholly in the Virgen de Guadalupe and what she represented to the people, you know.
But curiously enough, not necessarily for the Indians, just for, you know, where my mother started from, up, you know.
not down, you know.
So, and even knowing that she was, you know, the patron of the, you know, the indigenous people, you know.
That was true, but it was more than that, you know, according to my mother, you know.
And, but she, you know, they patronized her totally.
So for me,
I knew about it, I knew about Juan Diego and, you know, all this stuff, but it wasn't until I got into some of the huelgas over there and marchings and stuff like that, where I saw, you know, how they, well, everything was a Virginia de Guadalupe.
I could never escape her.
My whole life I've never been able to escape her, you know, but it's meant so much to all the people on different lines, you know, the campesinos, you know, from one perspective, the middle class people from another perspective, you know, and just
You know, the homies from another one, they get their tattoos, you know, and stuff like that.
They may not be goers, but they believe, you know, and they show it.
So everybody has a different way of showing their patriotism to the Vidhan, you know.
And me, my mother has a Vidhan in the back over there that I can look at every day.
That's the very first thing she brought into the house.
You're never going to escape.
No, ever.
That's interesting.
I was reading something.
I can't remember where.
It may have been from a book or something, but they were saying that a big push in Mexico, I believe, like in the early 19th century, or maybe it was in the 18th.
I can't remember.
But that...
the kind of like popularization of the virgen that we are familiar with today was a kind of mestizo thing or, you know, from the more middle and upper class segments of Mexican society.
And I don't know how, you know, how accurate that is, but kind of what you're talking about with your parents, right?
That they are
They sound like they want to be or they're aspiring to be that middle or upper class, whether, you know, in actuality financially or just by social status, you know.
They were middle class people, you know, and that was the goal because they came from poverty.
So they worked their way up from poverty and there was no way that they wanted for us to live that type of life.
or be in that type of environment.
I, on the other hand, wanted to know why.
Why, like, what their motivations were, or?
Why not?
What's there?
Uh-huh.
Like, why is it, what's so wrong with it?
Yes.
What is it that you're not wanting to see?
You know?
But that was me, you know?
And my parents...
I never understood that really.
My mother was like, why?
They always wanted to know what I was looking for, I guess.
And that was part of the thing with the Teatro Campesino.
They went over there and they wanted to know, what the hell are you involved in?
And they sat there and they listened.
They listened to all these vulgar words and stuff like that.
They said, come on, let's go.
Let's get out of here.
No, I'm not going anywhere, man.
I wasn't going anywhere.
They sound a lot like my grandparents, sort of, kind of.
My grandparents were... Well, my grandma was very religious.
My grandpa, not so much.
But they very much wanted a kind of middle-class, American dream type of life.
And I hear that a lot from people in their generation.
They're also born in the 20s.
with, you know, parents who are from Mexico and they're born here.
And so it's interesting to see kind of like similar, similar points of view, you know, from different families.
Yeah.
Well, you know, I, I, I have had my,
experience poverty experiences but i knew that i would never stay there and to me this is my castle you know and this is about the best that i'll ever do and i don't need more you know i'm not searching for more you know and and i think that's with some people you know i don't know why they keep i don't know where they're going you know but
I don't know if that comes with age where you finally decide that, you know, okay, this is it, you know.
But I preach my happiness, you know.
That doesn't mean that, you know, I can't win a lottery and stuff like that.
You can't go to Chauncey and try.
No.
But anyway, yeah, you know, I am who I am because of where I come from and experienced and chose to be around, you know.
Yeah.
And so I offer this to people now, you know, and just like with my buttons, it's my venture and my experience, the chicanismo.
And it's going to be on display over there at the banquet.
nice when is that banquet it's september 14th oh okay yeah nice so um yeah i'll i'll let you see them and uh yeah that'd be great um yeah so i can't uh i mean those are my two kind of main questions and i think uh we've got some good good stuff here is there anything else you would like to say or add and
to be recorded for posterity?
No.
No, it just, my brother showed me a lot.
The teatro showed me a lot.
The family showed me a lot, you know.
And I just hope that, you know,
Chicanismo lives on.
The Mestizos men are here and they've never gone.
They've always been here, you know?
And people, they need to know where they come from because the circle isn't completed until you've gone full circle and found out who you are now.
From your little speech right there, I was like, oh, I'm going to ask about that.
No, but you just invoked that word mestizos, right?
What does that mean to you?
What is a mestizo?
A Chicano?
It's more than a Chicano.
A mestizo is...
our beginning, you know.
It's a branch of our beginning and way back, you know, with some people.
Not everybody wants to go back, you know.
Not everybody's happy with knowing about their indigenousness
the raping of our culture and stuff like that.
Some people are just happy staying blind, I suppose.
But you are who you are and we've experienced a lot and we continue to experience a lot, especially right now with this
knucklehead of a leader trying to break us just like they were trying to break us in the past nothing's changed we're right here where we were 50 years ago 50 years from that it's all recycling and you have to you have to become educated about
about yourself, about your family, about your history, you know, and show pride, you know.
I've never left the Chicano culture.
I've never ever not been a Chicana.
1969, I became
and use the word Chicano for the first time, and it's never left my life.
Because once you are, you are.
And it's all encompassing of what it means to be Native, what it means to be Spaniard, what it means to be Mexican.
It's all encompassing.
We're all of that.
And it's just like with myself, I'm just trying to be happy living with who I am because I've gone back to find my family members, you know, and some of it is not pretty.
The Olguín name is not pretty.
Spaniard, you know.
And there's a lot of ugliness that comes with it.
But it's accepting it and moving on and finding yourself, I guess.
And that's what I've been trying to do.
Of course, my daughter doesn't care.
It's really different because you care so much as a person, but your child may not.
your grandchild may.
So you never know where it's gonna hit.
And just like with my parents, they didn't care so much to know, but I did.
And it hurts me to say about my child, it's like, okay, but it's not that they don't understand or they don't see, it's just that they choose to, you know,
skate over it you know yeah and there's a there's a lot of that yeah and so with this project that you have and with the project that they've been working on over here at the arte with that to me that shows hope you know and uh you know that you know that
We're survivors.
And so that's how I see it.
And we always will be.
Are we done?
We're done?
I guess so.
All right.
Thank you, Lupe.